---
title: best or optimal?
author: Casey Kuhlman
layout: post
permalink: /entry/best-or-optimal
st_cached:
  - '<ul class="socialize-this"><li></li></ul>'
st_cached_time:
  - 1330470148
st_twitter:
  - 0
st_reddit:
  - 'a:3:{s:9:"permalink";s:0:"";s:5:"score";i:0;s:12:"num_comments";i:0;}'
st_facebook:
  - 0
st_googleplusones:
  - 0
st_social_score:
  - 0
st_last_socialized:
  - 1365661013
st_tiny_url:
  - 
categories:
  - living
---
# 

I have decided to  
return to Vanderbilt this semester.  My job possibility with the Program  
Director for USAID down in Colombia is coagulating, but slowly.  I am  
going to try to set it up to be down there from January until August,  
and use that time to get a semester long externship from Vanderbilt.   
Then return and finish up two semesters and be done. 

When I came to Law School, as most of you know, I had three career  
tracks in mind: environmental lawyer for a plaintiff’s firm,  
media/entertainment lawyer centering my practice on the book industry,  
and international development (or as I say, helping developing countries  
pull themselves out of poverty without mortgaging their environments).   
Over the course of the year and this summer I have realized that I  
operate best and am most happy in the policy spectrum where I can pull  
on my interdisciplinary skills and my abilities to communicate with lay  
people.  The minutiae and the drudgery that would be required if I was  
in a firm are irreconcilable with my platform, my convictions and my  
goals of "making a goddamn difference."  I decided earlier this summer  
that the third track, international development, was where I needed to  
be.  I maintain that position. 

After making that decision I started to research my employment  
opportunities.  Most of the consulting firms and public agencies were  
recruiting their entry level employees from the MPP (masters of public  
policy) schools around the country.  When I thought about it, an MPP  
sounded enticing, and this degree was even more enticing when I started  
to pull the curriculum.  So I thought that maybe I should have an MPP  
instead of a JD.  But I was behind the power curve and would not be able  
to start for a year.  I thought about what to do during the interim.   
That was where I was when I last sent out a mass email. 

Since then I have realized from talking to friends, family and mentors  
(you all) that it was most advantageous to me to graduate with a JD.  A  
JD is one of the most marketable degrees available, and I have already  
finished the hardest part of it:  the first year.  A JD is also a  
sufficient way to get into international development.  Just because the  
firms and agencies pull mostly from MPP schools, that does not mean I  
cannot get a job with one of them with a JD.  It seems stupid not to  
finish my JD, even though I do not want to be a practicing attorney. 

After I made that realization I started to think about the possibility  
of doing a joint degree (JD/MPP).  I did more research and found out  
that I could get joint degrees at Georgetown and at George Washington.   
Both of these schools offered a JD curriculum in environmental and  
international law that dwarfs the possibilities Vanderbilt offers, not  
to mention their MPP curriculum’s.  Both of these schools are in DC and  
the experiential opportunities that would be available to me in DC (with  
a Presidential campaign, with the State Department, or with a consulting  
firm) dwarf the opportunities that would be available in Nashville.   
Both of these schools would allow me to start (if I was accepted as a  
transfer student) in January.  
  
This is a very lucrative possibility.  It is sexy.  It is a gamble.  It  
appeals to my sense of adventure, my gambling nature, and my  
wanderlust.  It would be the optimal solution.  But it would not be the  
best solution. 

It seems that the best solution, at this point, is to hammer through my  
Vanderbilt JD.  The curricular opportunities, if I choose wisely, will  
be sufficient to get me where I want to go.  With summers I can get some  
modicum of experiential learning to round out my resume.  And, frankly,  
it would be easier to not dislodge my entire life, and to just return. 

Last night I received an email from my connection down in Colombia.  I  
thought for a while that this was going to further contemplate my  
at-that-point-unresolved decision.  He wants writing samples and it is  
looking more and more likely that he will offer me some sort of an  
internship.  But it isn’t going to happen quickly.  At this point the  
soonest he could reasonably want to see me down there would be October.   
If I am offered an internship I will ask to start in January.  This will  
allow me to (hopefully) get credit and maintain my matriculation status  
as Vanderbilt.  It will keep me on my path to quickly making a  
difference.  It would fill in the gaps in my resume (language and  
applied experience in international development). 

So, in a sense, I am taking the easy road.  My wanderlust is modestly  
disappointed in me, but if I can get a great summer internship next  
summer (or eight months in Colombia) then I will just tell him to shut  
the hell up. 

~ # ~