---
categories:
- development
comments: true
date: "2006-10-12T00:00:00Z"
summary: Many of you have asked me what the hell development people do.  I will attempt
  over the course of the next few posts….which at the rate I’m currently writing other
  things will be the rest of the semester….to tell you about them.
meta: true
published: true
title: Philosophies
---

Many of you have asked me what the hell development people do.  I will attempt over the course of the next few posts….which at the rate I’m currently writing other things will be the rest of the semester….to tell you about them.

The following is an excerpt from an email that I sent to classmates of mine who are working on the Kosovo constitution.  It is a general statement of how I currently look at development problems and contains a few hints as to my political and philosophical disposition when I am actually offered the chance to solve some of these problems.  Specifically this is addressing a post-conflict rebuilding, but there are analogies to many aspects of ID.

POST-CONFLICT rebuilding and conflict mitigation is what I want to do for a living.  

To that end, I wanted to expound a bit on my philosophies that may give  
you  
guys a few ideas at a remove.  I am vastly ignorant on many topics,  
especially the complex recent history of the region and cultural  
dispositions  
of each ethnicity in it.  That aside, I’m never afraid to share my  
views.  If you don’t want them (this email is fairly lengthy) then just  
delete the email and tell me to shut it.

FIRSTLY, BOTTOM-UP solutions are best in the long run, in my opinion.  
The  
reason that 

America

is so  
stable is not just that we’re a market-based democracy — 

Palestine

is  
too.  It is what we have  
done with our market-based democracy.  

We have enabled and encourage small-business entrepreneurship.  This  
entrepreneurship  
led to ownership interests which led to entrenchment which led to a  
political  
impetus to protect the entrenchment of those with money.  Now whether  
you  
think that this is a good thing (depending on your particular political  
tilt)  
is aside from the fact that it has created a massive stability.  One  
may  
look at 

Finland

as a very stable country to emulate, but it would be a very different  
country  
without Nokia’s money.  

We have engaged in a bottom-up approach to politics.  This is  
structural  
as well as cultural.  It is structural in the sense that we allow a  
strong  
local government (local meaning state in the 

US

context) with deference given in  
each branch of the federal government when appropriate.  It is also  
cultural in that it isn’t often that you see someone getting elected to  
President or even federal Congress who hasn’t worked his or her way up  
through  
the system, at least in some limited sense.  This means that you must  
often participate in a lower level of sovereign government in order  
participate  
in the higher level.  This may seem banal, but may countries do not  
have  
such a cultural "bias" and will elect people who have worked their  
way up through the bureaucratic rungs on one level of government.

We have codified our openness.  Ian Bremmer wrote a book that strongly  
links a country’s openness to its stability.  Those that are the most  
open  
are the most stable, those that are the least open are also relatively  
stable.  There is a dip in the curve close to the least open side,  
where a  
country falls into deep instability and if it emerges "open" then it  
is on its way to a western style democracy.  Bremmer looks at openness  
in  
the communicative sense.  He asks what is a people’s ability to  
communicate with the outside world, as well as what are the lines of  
communication  
inside the country.  This isn’t a techno-centric thing, despite the  
inevitable connotations.  It is cultural and structural as well,  
involving  
the political regime established, the embracing of fundamental human  
rights  
(free expression, free assembly, etc.), education and the like.  This  
is  
obviously a very European idea and your codification of systems that  
retain a  
country’s openness are likely to sate many of the EU’s concerns.  

THE SECOND THEME is that although bottom-up solutions may be best in  
the long  
term, they may not work in many instances.  Many of the people who  
"do" development seem, to me, eternal optimists and people who really  
rely on the power of humanity.  This is all well and good, but problems  
arise when you give a people more power than they are able or willing  
to  
have.  It is the redneck winning the lottery syndrome, before you know  
it  
you have a culture of corruption with cadillacs sitting on monster  
truck wheels  
driving the politicians around (or, think post Soviet Russia with six  
men  
controlling the entire economy).  So in certain places, at certain  
times  
top down solutions may have to be imposed.  

I include in these top-down solutions establishment of patronage  
networks from  
the government to the people (which are ripe for corruption),  
establishment of  
semi-autonomous regions (which are ripe for future nationalistic  
worries –  
when many Shiites flood into Kurdish Iraq because Shiite Iraq is  
embroiled in  
civil war, why would the Kurds want to remain Iraqi?), establishment of  
some  
form of affirmative action (contract allocation, governmental seat  
allocation,  
etc.).  

The appeal of top-down solutions is that the ones who can govern do  
govern.  This centralizes the decisions and implementations in the  
hands  
of those that have the knowledge, experience and capacity to actually  
govern.  Much of the problem in the developing world is the lack of  
people  
who are trained to govern.  It isn’t a lack of ability nor is it a lack  
of  
capacity (often post-conflict rulers will have massive political  
capital and  
significant economic capital from a world community anxious to "solve  
the  
problem"), it is simply an education problem — at least in my mind.  
Incompetence will only frustrate the situation.  South Africa has  
worked  
not only because Mandela had massive political capital, but also  
because his  
monetary policies were spot-on what was required and generally he had  
figured  
out how to govern that country; alas the same things cannot be said for  
much of  
the rest of the continent where incompetent and self-serving rulers  
have  
created a movable feast of governance. Top-down solutions are also  
easier to  
impose, easier to regulate, have more accountability (the world bank  
will be  
happier to give money if it knows exactly what the money is going for),  
appeal  
to our intellectual notions of symmetry (80% of south africans are  
black and  
therefore blacks should have 80% of the parliamentary seats), and they  
have  
worked in many situations.

The problems with top-down solutions are easy to see when you look at  
the  
post-colonial world.  The problems that linger in latin america and 

africa

particularly are endless, many of them  
attributable to top-down solutions imposed by governments from afar  
without a  
careful consideration of why and how they were being adopted and  
implemented.  A curious situation arises with these things because  
there  
is not a historical precedent of not working, it is the exact  
opposite.  
Many people have seen them work as stop-gap solutions and then be  
exploited or  
create long-term problems.  Think how long colonialism worked and the  
long-term cultural and structural problems that its hangover has  
caused.  
One of the major problems with 

Yugoslavia

from the start, as I’ve read, was that the Kosovars had semi-autonomy  
which  
threatened the Serbians.  So if that was a problem in the 

Yugoslavia

situation, creating resentment by the Serbs that fueled Slobadon’s  
fire, maybe  
doing the same thing to the Serbs in Kosovo is not a good idea.  That  
is  
very simplistic, and maybe wrong, but it illustrates the point that in  
the long-view  
it may not be a very good idea.  

SO HOW TO BALANCE top-down short-term stability with bottom-up  
long-term  
stability?  This is the whole thing.  

Developers would love to see a  
stable-western-style-market-based-democracy.  Institutions (UN, IMF,  
WB,  
EU) would love to see top-down solutions that have strong  
accountability.  
Balancing them takes time, education to develop the cultural  
dispositions that  
allow for the give and take a society needs to grow.  Balancing also  
requires a certain amount of structural flexibility.  So whatever the  
solution is, it has to take into account the culture and history of the  
region,  
the country and the specific minorities or problem. 

Generally I’ve seen two paradigms: (1) step-approach, phase-out  
approach.  
This is where institutions start out very centralized and then they  
slowly let  
the sand fall through the fingers.  An apt example is 

Turkey

, Ataturk had strong centralized  
control  
but never "wanted" that and eventually, after he passed and 

Turkey

could  
"handle it," the centralized control was distributed.  (2)  
structural-flexibility from the start approach.  This is the 

US

founding  
father’s approach.  They built structural flexibility into the system  
from  
the start that allows for the various balloons to expand and contract  
without  
blowing up.  

How to choose between these paradigms?  Where to put the flexibility  
and  
rigidity?  Where to put the phase-out decisions points?  All these  
questions are what makes the problems complex and interesting.  The  
answers are often buried in the historical and cultural predicates.  

~ # ~